Title: Visiting my high school in Arkansas
Date: 2013-08-21 20:41
Author: cranmer
Category: Blog
Slug: visiting-my-high-school-in-arkansas

(Originally posted at [Quantum Diaries][])

This week I will be going to visit my high school in Arkansas.  It was
20 years ago that the school first opened its doors and I was part of
that Charter class.  The [Arkansas School for Mathematics, Science & the
Arts][] is a bit unusual, it is "one of only fifteen public, residential
high schools in the country specializing in the education of gifted and
talented students who have an interest and aptitude for mathematics
and science."  And this was a state-wide school, so it was a lot like
leaving for college two years early.

Arkansas is not particularly well known for its educational system -- as
a kid we would joke "thank god for Mississippi" when Arkansas would come
in 49/50th in some educational ranking.  My brother attended Little
Rock's Central High, which is famous for its history in the civil rights
movement and the [desegregation][] of the school system).  I'm happy to
see that Arkansas is [doing better in the educational rankings][], but
there is still a long way to go.  For those of you not from the US, I've
included a map showing this rural state in the southern part of the US.

<iframe src="https://www.google.com/maps?sll=34.49240086355438,-93.0573922516262&amp;sspn=0.24536292995578443,0.41929959351837387&amp;t=m&amp;q=Arkansas+School+for+Mathematics+&amp;dg=opt&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;hq=Arkansas+School+for+Mathematics&amp;hnear=&amp;ll=34.517915,-93.058193&amp;spn=32.34113,52.514503&amp;output=embed" height="350" width="425" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>  
<small>[View Larger Map][]</small>


{% img //www.quantumdiaries.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/2133427453_aa9abffc68_b.jpg 300  "Kyle Cranmer with Bill Clinton in Arkansas Governor's office in 1991." %}

The school has an interesting history, it was created in 1991 by an act
of the Arkansas Legislature.  Bill Clinton was Governor of Arkansas at
the time, and I happened to get a photo with him that year in his office
(wearing my friend's hideous sweater, since my clothes were all dirty
while playing at his house).

While the school is more closely modeled after the [North Carolina
School of Science and Mathematics][], one of the other early schools of
this type was the [Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy][].  Here's
a tidbit from Wikipedia:

> Nobel laureate [Leon Lederman][], director emeritus of nearby [Fermi
> National Accelerator Laboratory][] in [Batavia, Illinois][], was among
> the first to propose the Illinois school in 1982, and together with
> Governor [Jim Thompson][] led the effort for its creation. Thompson
> has noted with pride that he chose to build IMSA instead of competing
> for the ill-fated [supercollider][] project.

This school changed my life.  I learned calculus and calculus-based
physics from Dr. Irina Lyublinskaya, a Russian-educated Ph.D. physicist
that had left Russia due to religious persecution.  I took an organic
chemistry in high school with awesome labs where we extracted DNA from
plants and ran gel electrophoresis.  I was frustrated by the lack of
activities, so I [got involved in school politics][]. But probably the
most important aspect of my time there was learning from my friends and
taking on all sorts of projects.  I learned some basic electronics from
my electronics guru friends Colin and  Stephen (who made a TV from a
scrap oscilloscope), my friend Thomas made a pretty nice Tesla Coil, we
used to get in trouble making [potato guns][] and I almost lost an eye
with a rail gun trial.  I remember making a [binary half adder][] out of
some huge [old telphone relay switches][], and when I connected the
current the you could hear the simple computation proceed
knock-knock-knock until the lights at the end of the big piece of
plywood I was using lit up to confirm 1+2=3.  My friend Sean taught me
about programming, my friend Colin taught me about Neural Networks and
Fast Fourier Transforms.  I spent weeks soldering together
an [EEG][] for my science fair project to identify different classes of
thought by using brain waves and identifying them by analyzing their
characteristic frequency spectrum with a neural network -- an idea I got
while watching a documentary of Stephen Hawking.  And we were all
on-line and exposed to the world wide web in its formative years
(93-95).

Tomorrow I leave to go visit the school 20 years later.  We will meet
with legislators, parents, alumni, students, and supporters.  I look
forward to telling the students about the tremendously exciting career
I've had in particle physics, culminating in the discovery of the Higgs
boson.

  [Quantum Diaries]: http://www.quantumdiaries.org/author/kyle-cranmer/
  [Arkansas School for Mathematics, Science & the Arts]: http://asmsa.org/about
  [desegregation]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Rock_Nine
  [doing better in the educational rankings]: http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2013/01/10/16sos.h32.html?tkn=RLRF%2B4mUV1fjxGZAPk7Od%2FfW1p2K2SFHTAx9&cmp=clp-edweek&intc=EW-QC13-EWH
  [View Larger Map]: https://www.google.com/maps?sll=34.49240086355438,-93.0573922516262&sspn=0.24536292995578443,0.41929959351837387&t=m&q=Arkansas+School+for+Mathematics+&dg=opt&ie=UTF8&hq=Arkansas+School+for+Mathematics&hnear=&ll=34.517915,-93.058193&spn=32.34113,52.514503&source=embed
  [North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics]: %20http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Carolina_School_of_Science_and_Mathematics
  [Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illinois_Mathematics_and_Science_Academy#History
  [Leon Lederman]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leon_M._Lederman
    "Leon M. Lederman"
  [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermilab
    "Fermilab"
  [Batavia, Illinois]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batavia,_Illinois
    "Batavia, Illinois"
  [Jim Thompson]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_R._Thompson
    "James R. Thompson"
  [supercollider]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconducting_Super_Collider
    "Superconducting Super Collider"
  [got involved in school politics]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/hoonynoo/2174018822/
  [potato guns]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-BGkUBmN9GU
  [binary half adder]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adder_(electronics)
  [old telphone relay switches]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relay
  [EEG]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electroencephalography
